Izanami, one of the challenges
of a start-up is to get
the right funding for, well, because
first it is for the project
of NAVCA and then to go
funding that growth.
And the lifetime financing formulas,
which is to go to the bank, here
are not usually used, right?
No, it’s actually something that
when you talk to people who
work in banks you’re surprised,
right?
But in the world of start-ups,
going to a bank for money is
the last option you are asked.
That is, you are thinking about
public financing through an ENISA or
an ICON or a CDT rather than going to
a bank, right?
This is to give a heart attack
to someone in the banking sector
because of all the companies
I know that have grown, many
companies that are immense
in our environment, people...
The bank’s report is the first conversation
in years in which he talked
about financing a project with
bank financing.
And it’s starting to happen, right?
That is, they are beginning to have policies
of a lot of coin investment, of hearing,
if an investor has already validated
and entered, right?
Venture capital is in place.
But it’s far from your culture and
your way of doing things, isn’t it?
For them, they keep talking about personal
avals, they keep talking about
mortgaging your home to give you
the money.
But when they don’t end up
understanding that we’re playing
a game with very high risks in
which no one will endorse a project
with either their home, their mother’
s, or anything personal, but
you’re playing a game in which
you then multiply too much.
Of course, I think the issue here is
that the risk is very high, the
profitability is very high and
the banks don’t get into this first.
And in addition, well, you can choose
bank financing, what happens is that
if you want to support with your property,
with your home, with your family
an idea that the percentage
of failure is 90%, because there
is yourself.
It doesn’t seem the most sensible thing, right?
justly.
So, well, the different
types of funding we can get.
The first one is called
bootstrapping, which is like not
treating your boots and having it forward,
which is a name like very sexy, now
everything is said in English and
it is more sexy, but it’s how they’
ve been doing business all their
lives, right?
It is like Amancio Ortega
or the English Court Empire.
I end up doing that and start with
my own resources and I’m
going to fund myself from what gives
me my own operations.
It is my clients who finance me.
Ideally, this would be the best
way to start a business.
What better way to set up
a business than to have enough
cash flow to reinvest and get to
the end of the way with a 100%
of the company?
This, indeed, is the ideal, but
in certain business models
directly it is impossible.
and exact.
We talked to Miguel Vicente,
founder of Wallapop, and many other
companies that share a business
model of marketplace-rated
platforms and talked to us
that in the first years what
you have to do is to win
more criticism.
It is impossible that in such
a model you can finance
growth with your own operations.
If you can do it, it is phenomenal.
And we’re also back a little bit to
the fact that before we’re innovating,
we’re doing new things that haven’
t been done before.
So, aspiring to generate enough
cash to fund this whole
period of experimentation
is unrealistic.
The second source of funding we
have is the famous SFFF, Friends,
Families and Full, which is where
I am starting to validate
and I start to pull investments
from my closest circle.
This is a very delicate point for
several reasons.
The first is because for a particular
person, because for your grandmother
having saved 60,000 euros is
probably the savings of a
lifetime.
You can fund those 60,000 euros
in three marketing campaigns
in a month and they are useless.
So we have to keep a little of the
magnitude in mind.
How much does it cost to your grandmother
to save those 60,000 euros or to your
parents or uncles?
And how quickly you spend them when
you start playing other things.
And another risk that this type
of financing has is that you can
end up with an absolutely chaotic
corporate structure that makes
your business no longer attractive
for external financing.
For a professional investor, a
venture capital, a business angel,
an accelerator, entering a society
in which the cake is divided
between 15, between 16, you have
a lot of minority shareholders,
makes the company very
unattractive.
First, because the entrepreneur is already
starting from the super diluted starting
line and there is no room for
more money to enter and get diluted
at the end.
And secondly because a board of
management, which is like a baptism,
which is full of people, each one
that opins, is very difficult to
get an alignment of interests
of all investors if they are 16
and also are investors who are
not professionals.
I respect the Friends, Fools and
Family, what I would say is,
the advice I would give is, if
you can start with your money better,
but it is very common, the three
F's is very common because
entrepreneurs often don't
have enough money to start,
and the logical and natural
is to turn to people around you.
If you can get people to put
in money they don’t need, you
can avoid a lot of trouble
because you may think you’re
going to succeed, but the risk
is high and compromising
the wealth or investments
of people around you can
put you in an uncomfortable
situation.
So ask for a money they don’t
need, in small tokens for example,
and always let your investors
very clear, eye, this is a very
risky investment, if we’re
fine, you’ll earn money
with this, you’ll multiply
it by 10, but you’re likely
to lose it.
That is, don’t over-sell, because
as you over-sell and then fail, you’
ll get colored and you’ll lose
friends.
And you’re over selling to people who
love you and who already have, that
is, who can’t be objective with you.
You tell your mother, mom, I have
this idea, such, I don’t know what,
I don’t know how much, and your mom,
let’s, pull the money under
the stones and your mom won’t have
that more professional investor
mindset of analyzing risks,
right?
He will be thrown into the pool for you.
And then, to solve that problem
of having a board of directors,
that is, a very complex corporate
structure, a recommendation
would be, for example, that
those partners be syndicated.
That is, well, I have many minority
partners, but I make them all
syndicate, I put a representative
and then I have a 15, a 10, a 20%
of my company that is represented
by one person and that then between
them in a private pact are distributed,
because if not, it
makes it all very complicated.
actually is.
A further source of funding
or investment would be incubators
or accelerators of startups.
Incubators is a more early stage,
it is to those you go when you have
an idea practically in a power point
and that help and support you during
the entire phase of validation of
the idea and an accelerator
enters more in a more early stage
stage in which I already have a
MVP, I have some first clients
and what they do is give me
the network, contacts and
mentoring to grow.
The concept is the same, the difference
is at what point you go to
one or the other.
and exact.
What do they bring to you?
It depends a lot.
In this world of incubators and
accelerators there were data
from Startup Explorer this year
that last year grew by 216%.
Read this morning that the Vatican
has launched its own accelerator
of startups.
So, we are beginning to have
an ecosystem that, look, is very
good, because in the end this is
a funnel.
The more startups feel at the start
of the funnel, the more successful startups
we will have at the end.
But you also have to be very
careful because we have accelerators,
professional incubators that do
it very well, that take a lot
of time and that provide you with
money, provide you with a space to
be, that is, give you free offices,
provide you with networks of contacts,
provide you with access to subsequent
capital, that is, they are accelerators
that already have contacts
with investors who will
present your project.
That is, if you don’t have the network
and don’t have the money and you
want to undertake, you have an
idea, really what seems logical in
this situation is that you rely on
an accelerator.
But you have to be very careful
because in the end there are cases in
Spain of accelerators that neither
give you office nor give you money,
give you sporadic mentorships and are
asking you for high percentages
of your company in exchange
for a lord with more experience
than you, once a month to tell
you two things.
Yes, what happens is that I understand that
there are people, there are entrepreneurs
who don’t know who to turn to, they don’
t have where to go.
Here the main advice would be, and this
is a advice that Cavídez gave me
at the time, that if you really believe
your project, if you really believe
what you are doing, the most expensive
thing you have is the percentage
of your company.
So at first it is very easy
to use the capital to get
a uncle who develops the app
or to get a uncle who gives me
a name, but sharing that capital
very lightly at first
is mortgaging you in the
future.
So, there are incubator accelerators
that can mean, not the success,
but a very good start
for any start-up, a very
important push.
We have a fantastic example of Y
Combinator in the United States and there
are others that can hurt you.
There is a good saying that in
the gold fever, the one who earned
the most money was the one who
sold the pans.
So, to models and markets of these
that are growing so fast, with
financing rounds so juicy as those
we have had in recent years, there
is a lot of shrinking blood that
is drawn to see what happens and that
with putting a billar and a pair
of chulos sofas and saying that
you give mentorship, they are taking
people 5%, 10% and 15% of their
companies.
You have to be careful and see well.
Yes, but it is good for our students
to know what an incubator, an accelerator
provides them with and I encourage
those who are in this phase to investigate
which ones are in their country
and to evaluate which ones
are the best.
The next source of funding that
we could apply to would be
Business Angels.
What is a Business Angel?
A Business Angel is usually an
entrepreneur who has sold one, two,
three several projects and who
is using that money he has earned
from his own projects to reinvest
them in projects that are
starting.
They have various motivations.
They have the motivation to
bring all this I’ve learned
in my recent projects to
help someone get it ahead.
They also have some conversations with
them and have that point to return.
I have also been away, I want
to return a little society and
also because it is fun for them.
Entrepreneurs like to throw things
and have the opportunity to
accompany someone.
By definition, a business angel in
addition to money usually gives you
a lot of know-how.
He is a guy with a lot of experience
who has already been through several
times for what you are going through
at that moment and who can contribute
a lot to you at that stage.
Real and powerful business angels, there
are few.
For many years, I remember ten years
ago, it was already a talk of Business
Angels, it was a whole lie.
But currently, effectively, people
who have made good successes do what
they do is reinvest in companies
younger people and others.
This is something real and helps.
And here, like in the accelerators
and incubators, the same
happens.
That is, there is suddenly a
lot of investor, a lot of Business Angel
that comes from other sectors,
not necessarily technological, because
a person who comes from an industrial
sector, who has sold something industrial,
who has said, this is the Internet,
that money is earned and they
get to invest.
You have to be very careful here
because the expertise of this guy
has nothing to do with what you
will need.
That is, the path he took to launch
his industrial company is diametrically
opposite to what you will
need and the network
of contacts he has can not
provide you much.
So, you have to be very careful
with the partners you choose.
This was a advice that I was given
in a box that I didn’t apply for
anything, that is, hear, investigate
you too to why someone wants to
give you money, you don’t have
to accept it at first.
That is, you also have to
ask the investor questions and
you have to make sure it will
be aligned with your interests,
because a project can fall by
a bad team, but you can also
fall by having some bad investors.
A step further, we go to
Venture Capital.
Venture Capital is usually another
profile, that is, a Venture Capital
at the end they are entrepreneurs
in themselves, because it is a
group of people with experience
in the sector who do what they
do is raise a fund of financing,
they look for larger investors,
family offices or larger
companies that give them money
so that they in a certain
period of time invest in
projects, invest in
startups and get them
a return.
Usually the figures they handle
is, you hear, we know that from
ten projects we will get out
well two, then multiplying, making
one by ten, in five years
I will have a profitability
of 15%.
Yes, something like that.
We have been talking with Javier
Torremocha and gave us data on
the profitability they expect or
the average ones they are getting.
This makes the way they invest
and the relationship they
establish with entrepreneurs
very specific.
One thing that marks their relationships
a lot is this five-year
period.
A point comes when Kibo or any
other Venture Capital has
to return the money to its investors.
This makes it possible to set
periods of de-investment and that
they in the partners’ agreements that
sign with you have a relative hurry
to leave.
That is, basically what I want
us to understand is that Venture
Capital comes in to accompany
you for a while but comes in
to leave.
and exact.
And it comes with the intention
of multiplying by 10 or 20
its investment, which, as we will
see in later classes, determines
that a project is investable or
not.
Because you can have a viable, fantastic
project that makes you win a lot
of money, but that is not reversible
because the investor does
not see that it has an outcome
or can make that multiplication.
Basically, if you run a bar, the
bar won’t be worth 10 times more
in life.
It will generate a cash flow.
You will not be invested in a venture
capital.
and exact.
Another form of funding
is a media for equity.
What is a Media for Equity?
A media for equity is when I already
have a product, I already have a product
validated and I have a few first customers
and I talk to large television
groups, with Atres Media, with Mediaset,
with Movistar Plus, so that they
give me visibility and advertising
on their channels in exchange
for percentages in my company.
I cannot afford to spend 10 million
euros on a big television campaign
where I compete with a Coca-Cola
or a Renault, but I have a percentage
of my company that I can
give in exchange for that
visibility to the valuations
that are managed.
Instead of hiring it you, which is very
expensive, and that it is very possible
that you do not have the ability,
that you do not have the money, what
you do is that you share your company
with this group, with
the media and they position you.
Plus then you have a very powerful
strategic partner that can help
you in other things, we will only
see it in detail.
We will see it in more detail because
in Spain we have some very good
success cases, we have the red fridge,
we have Globo, we have Jovan
Talent, we have Chick-Fi, we
have many examples that this
has been done very well and
has worked.
People who are outside of this
world don’t know it, but it’s also
true that very few companies have
the ability to make an agreement
with a communication
group, because there are few
companies that can be
attractive, that have
huge ratings.
Exactly, and that they have a
product more market enough for
this sales channel to serve you,
because I can have a fantastic
B2B company, for example guys from
Typeform who have a very good service,
but it is more a B2B and would
not make sense, it is
not your channel.
Then companies that are B2C,
which have a much more market
product and that have those
valuations so high as to
make a median for equity, there
are few, but in cases where
the truth is made it usually
works very well.
Well, then I’ll make a final
review.
How to finance your startup?
Ideally with your customers.
Ideally, your business model will
allow you to generate a cash flow
that will allow you to finance that growth.
Sometimes it is possible, sometimes not.
The first steps are usually taken with
your money and by resorting to Friends,
Fools or Family, which is asking
for help from those around
you, who have already commented
that there are risks and have given
a series of guidelines that
our students should have very clear
and do.
You can use incubators, accelerators
that help you not only by providing
you with funding, but also give
you a certain structure
that is as if you were funding
because you save certain
things of structure,
fixed expenses, offices,
etc.
You can go to Business Angels
which are mostly the most interesting.
They are people who have had success
by doing previously, who have made
a good success, that is, who have sold
their company, have earned a lot
of money and who have the money
and the know-how to provide to other
entrepreneurs.
And this is a lot.
There is a lot in the environment
of good projects.
And the environment I know in Spain,
the most interesting projects
are all participated
by people who also, by
success cases that have already
sold.
We talk about venture capital,
which is a more professional investment,
which are funds that are created
to invest in startups with a
period of time and that we will
analyze in detail in another
class.
And lastly you talk about media
for equity, which is that instead
of hiring campaigns in mass
media like television, radio, etc.,
which is very much money, what you
do is give a percentage of your
company that is very attractive,
you give it to a media
and you change it for that space
in the media.